Mangroves are the species of plants that live along the shores, rivers, and estuaries in the tropical and subtropical regions with distinct tangled roots arising from the mud. Nowadays, they are considered a very valuable ecosystem by scientists and coastal dwellers which was once neglected. Mangroves remarkably contribute to environmental maintenance by providing various ecosystem services and livelihood to the individuals dependent on these wonders of nature. Under severe salinity stress, they tend to grow, flower, and provide support to the environment. By encompassing various physiological adaptations mangroves exhibit a wide range of survival methods, they have a well-developed mechanism for salt exclusion, ion-regulation, photosynthesis, and nutrient uptake. True mangroves also display an efficient mechanism in coping with salinity stress, leaf size, growth, biomass yield, ion regulations, and water relations exhibiting a significant role in the maintenance. Some species of mangroves are highly tolerant to salt stress and are found to exhibit better performance than less salt-tolerant ones. Mangroves also exhibit various phytochemicals and bioactive properties including pesticide activities and most of their parts can be utilized. Comparing certain physiological adaptations and biological properties exhibited by true mangroves against stress gives accountable information, thereby paving a strong foundation for future works on the “Green Lungs” of the planet.

Mangroves are integral plants of tropical inter-tidal forest communities which consists of woody trees and shrubs proliferating in the zone between land and sea along the tropical coastlines of the world (Parida et al., 2004a, Parida et al., 2004b). Worldwide, prime mangrove ecosystems are at escalating peril of inundation, salinization, and other possible threats of climate-driven sea-level rise (Barik et al., 2018). With the rising sea level, the survival of mangroves is uncertain if their landward movement is barricaded by a lack of ample and acceptable room for expansion and the sea-level rise is at a faster pace than mangrove migration (Semeniuk, 1994, Ellison and Stoddart, 1991; Mcleod and Salm, 2006; Lange et al., 2010). True mangroves (Table 1) are those found in the mangrove vegetation and which are absent in the terrestrial ecosystem. They constitute the major structures in the mangrove community whereby forming the pure stand. To this, they have specialized morphological adaptations to survive in the mangrove environment and are believed to have a specialized mechanism for salt exclusion (Quadros and Zimmer, 2017).

Heat, drought, and salinity are the main abiotic stresses to which plants generally respond, involving signal reception and transduction followed by genetical and physiological feedback. Commonly, plants are capable of adapting themselves to certain stress. But few species tend to survive in habitats with a high level of abiotic stress. Among the various abiotic stresses, salinity constitutes more than 7 % of the world’s land area, approximately 930 million hectares (Munns and Tester, 2008).

Salt is one of the key abiotic factors that control the productivity and dissemination of the mangroves in the tropical and subtropical intertidal regions. This occurs mainly due to the deposition of excessive Na+ ions which causes an osmotic imbalance in the living organisms (Alongi, 2002). Mangroves cannot withstand freshwater; due to the rise in salt content which turns into their physiological component. A variety of salt-induced tests were conducted in plants under different salt concentrations and evaluated the difference in the percentage of salinity against control conditions. Notably, the plants grown under a natural saline ecosystem tend to manage their salt tolerance more than others (Lokhande and Suprasanna, 2012).

High salinity can induce both hyper-ionic and hyper-osmotic stress conditions. The most common type of stress is induced by high sodium (Na+) and chlorine (Cl-) concentrations in the soil solutions. If the water status is altered it leads to a reduction in initial growth. Subsequently, their contribution to cell development, expansion, and acceleration of cell death is yet to be clarified. Amidst, these effects of salt stress, halophytes are the large group of plants that can withstand and grow at their optimum rate under high salinity. Therefore, it is necessary to understand how these plants maintain the complex physiological and biochemical states in extreme saline conditions (Hasegawa et al., 2000).

The majority of mangroves are found in Asia, followed by Africa and South America. In India, at 11.4226°N and 79.7748°E lies the Pichavaram mangrove forest. The tidal disparity of this estuarine system enhances the knowledge of the mechanism of salt tolerance and the distribution of mangrove species. Aside from the high saline levels, the plants in such an estuarine system may face many other abiotic stresses that change with elevation in the inter-tidal zone. At low elevation, tidal inundation is recurrent and longer in duration. Whereas, at a higher elevation, tidal inundations are less persistent. This will result in the drying up of soil between the tidal cycles and consequently increase the soil salinity. These salinity gradients show the influence of the species distribution and morphology of the plants (Maricle et al., 2009) and necessitate a different kind of adaptive mechanism for the plants. Similarly, reports suggest the importance of unconventional components; temperature, CO2, and rise in sea level as the main drivers of mangrove communities worldwide and locally (Krauss et al., 2008, Munns and Tester, 2008).

Mangroves maintain the low water potential of the cell sap, thereby preserving the active water uptake by the root cells at higher salt levels in the soil solution by synthesizing and accumulating ‘compatible solutes’ or osmolytes. These osmolytes help in maintaining the rising osmotic pressure and maintain both turgor pressure and the gradient for water intake. Additionally, these compounds help in the conservation of the structural integrity of enzymes, membranes, and other cellular components (Mokhamed et al., 2006). However, there is a striking relationship between the identity of osmolytes used for osmotic adjustments and the taxonomic position of the considered plant species.

Nowadays, mangrove ecosystems are studied widely to discover new chemicals with biomedical potential. A large number of biologically active compounds are present. To date, 81 mangrove species have been reported out of which 46 species occur in India, out of which 36 mangrove species are exclusively used as traditional medicines due to the presence of bioactive compounds present. Similarly, mangrove plants can be a good alternative for bioactive sources, as they are believed to contain a variety of bioactive substances that are considered safe and environmentally friendly. Several mangrove extracts were of high potential as a mosquito repellent, especially against Aedes aegypti. The efficacy of mangroves as a natural insecticide is very well elucidated in the previous works. Plant-based insecticides are the green solution to counter the effect of synthetic insecticides, these green insecticides don’t cause any illicit effect on the environment and on the soil microbiota. The Hibiscus genus is generally rich in a variety of bioactive substances like lignanamide, phytosterols naphthalenes, tocopherols, polyphenols, carotenoids, flavonoids, anthocyanins, and long-chain fatty acids (Holser et al., 2004). The genus sonneratia is also said to possess the same kind of activity and tend to be much more active in pest control.

Plants also have an important role in pesticide activity in connection with the physiological adaptation of plants. Various plants respond to different levels of pesticide activity in plants. Generally, insecticidal compounds fall under four classes: Organochlorides, organophosphates, carbamates, and pyrethroids. Organophosphates and carbamates are the major classes of insecticidal compounds of use. The use of these insecticidal activities has been banned in many countries due to its negative effects on non-targeted organisms including humans. Therefore, botanical insecticides are a promising field with a large source of pest control compounds (Franzen, 1993). The first insecticidal substance used by humans was extracted from plants, Thus, more than 2000 species of plants are known to have some insecticidal activity today (Jacobson, 1989). Natural pesticides when compared to synthetic ones are safer for the environment, non-toxic to health, biodegradable as well as could be used for integrated pest management (Kim et al., 2003). Thus, in the middle of the 17th century, effective insect-control agents were discovered which were pyrethrum, nicotine, and rotenone (Dev and Koul, 1997). Literature study proves that mangrove plant extracts possess bioactivity against humans, animals as well as plant pathogens. Several novel bioactive constituents have been characterized from mangroves leading to clinical, toxicological, and economic importance. Additionally, they can remove several types of contaminants such as heavy metals, persistent metal-organic compounds as well as pesticides (Bandaranayake, 1998).

In this review, we discuss the morphological and physiological adaptations of true mangroves induced due to salinity stress such as; photosynthesis, ion-homeostasis, yield, filtration, water relations, and phytochemicals and bioactive activity along with the pesticidal activity of mangroves.
1.1. What is salinity stress?

Salinity is a prime element that controls seedling growth. The accumulation of excessive salts in the soil which eventually results in the inhibition of crop growth and leads to crop death is defined as salt stress. They include the replacement of copious physiological and metabolic processes, on behalf of extremity and periods of stress and thereby inhibiting crop production. On the first hand, plant growth is influenced by the salinity of soil in the form of osmotic stress and ion toxicity (Gupta and Huang, 2014).

At the early stages of salinity stress, the capacity of the root system to intake water is lowered and the loss of water leaves is enhanced due to osmotic stress of high salt concentration in soil and plants this salinity stress is often regarded as hyperosmotic stress (Munns, 2005). Osmotic stress is found to induce various physiological variations at the initial phases of salinity stress such as obtrusion of membranes, nutrient imbalance, inability to detoxify reactive oxygen species (ROS), dissimilarities in the antioxidant enzymes and reduced photosynthetic activity, and lesser stomatal aperture (Rahnama et al., 2010).

Plants about salinity stress can be mainly divided into two parts: (i) Growth reduction which is independent of ion, but facilitates the stomatal closing and inhibiting the cell expansion (occurring -no need) in the shoot (Munns and Passioura, 1984, Munns and Termaat, 1986) (ii) the cytotoxic ion build-up will be dominant whereby slowing down the metabolism, causing premature senescence and ultimately leading to cell death (Roy et al., 2014).

In other words, salinity stress can also be defined as hyper ionic stress. The toxic effects of the salinity stress led to the accumulation of Na+ and Cl- ions in NaCl concentrations in the plant tissues of the soil. As both Na+ and Cl- enter the cells, severe ionic imbalance occurs and surfeit intake induces consequential physiological disorders. With higher sodium concentrations, greater inhibition of absorption of potassium ions occurs which is crucial for proliferation resulting in curtailed productivity and senescence (James et al., 2011). When the salt enters the root system, it triggers several signal cascade activations by the initiation of ion tolerance by blocking sodium ingress into the root and reducing the sodium changeover. For instance, Avicennia marina demonstrates higher salt forbearance (Kirui et al., 2008), whereas Rhizophora mucronata shows relatively high salt tolerance when compared with low salt tolerating species such as Bruguiera sexangula, Sonneratia caseolaris, and Aegiceras corniculatum (Hogarth, 2007; Jayatissa et al., 2008). From the various studies, a different stimulus produced by mangrove seedlings at two different salinities was evaluated and identified. Neither taxonomy nor vivipary features were the perpetual indicators of salinity tolerance in the other seven species (Asaeda and Barnuevo, 2019).

The physiological factors fluctuate with altered climate and rise in sea level due to global warming. It is very difficult to understand how mangroves cope with the fluctuating salinities for finer management of the resources in a drifting environment.
2. Mechanism of salt tolerance in mangroves

Plants have various physiological mechanisms to cope with high salt concentrations. These mechanisms include ion homeostasis, photosynthesis, biomass yield, filtration mechanism, and water relations.
2.1. Morphological adaptations of true mangroves

Morphological adaptation can be defined as the structural change in which the organism has a better chance of survival in its habitat. The zonation of mangroves is mainly dependent on the climatic and hydrological factors that modify the structural developments of mangrove stands. Notably, high salinity can be dangerous to the plants, both salt toxicity and dehydration can lead to low water potential. Based on the salinity concentration, the zones for mangroves plantation can be divided into three landward, middle, and seaward zones. It was found that salinity, inundation, and sedimentation rate tend to increase toward shore 

From various studies, it is observed that both halophytes and non-halophytes display a remarkable level of anatomical changes when subjected to elevated levels of salinity. The most noticeable characteristics found in salt-tolerant mangrove leaves are increased leaf succulence (mgH2O cm−2) and a smaller increase in mesophyll surface area to leaf area ratio (Ameso/A). This reveals the tendency of halophytes in maintaining a constant mesophyll area which leads to an adaptive feature for shielding the photosynthetic apparatus from the harmful effects of salts. Plants that live in high saline conditions are adapted to minimize water loss to prevent dehydration and exclusion of salts that are inimical to their metabolism.

Surya and Hari (2018) have arranged the true mangrove species according to values of vessel vulnerability and vessel mesomorphy related to its salinity tolerance: Rhizophora apiculata < Rhizophora mucronate < Excoecaria agallocha < Sonneratia alba < Sonneratia caseolaris < Bruguiera gymnorrhiza < Bruguiera cylindrica < Aegiceras corniculatum < Bruguiera sexangula < Acanthus ilicifolius < Acanthus ebracteatus < Avicennia marina < Avicennia officinalis (Surya and Hari, 2018). According to Pal et al., 2017a, Pal et al., 2017b, Excoecaria agallocha species can be easily propagated under high salinity conditions. It was hypothesized that levels of the leaves affected the co-existence of Avicennia germinans and Lumnitzera racemosa which are found in areas with low nitrogen levels and moderate salinity for a minimum period of the year (Lovelock and Feller, 2003).

An experiment was conducted by Kura-Hotta et al. (2001), indicating that cells grown at a concentration of 150 mM NaCl, show the restoration of the level of Na+ ions to the original level. Whereas, when they are cultured at 50 mM NaCl concentration, the cell growth is suppressed. In a similar study, it was found that a salt secreting mangrove, A. corniculatum sustains easily and can be grown under moderate salinities whereas, at higher levels of salinity (250 mM), they get acclimatized within a couple of weeks (Parida et al., 2004a, Parida et al., 2004b). In another study, the seedling height of Rhizophora apiculata was seriously affected by salinity concentrations. The finest height and width of Rhizophora apiculata seedlings were noticed to be 0.5 % of salt concentrations. To withstand salinity stress or water stress, polyisoprenoids in the mangrove plants play a significant role (Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019).

Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018 confirmed that Rhizophora mucronata is an inland plant with a growth rate of 96 %. Water salinity always affects growth and nitrogen assimilation. During the rainy season, the trunk growth of Avicennia alba considerably increases with the seasonal fluctuation in soil and water salinity. Due to the combinatorial effect of low water salinity and large nutrient influx enhancing the trunk growth (Komiyama et al., 2019). Similarly, R. apiculata was more salt-tolerant than C. tagal, the highest leaf area of Ceriops tagal was acquired at 1.5 % salinity concentration whereas Rhizophora apiculata displayed a much higher area (Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018). In Merabu Islands, the optimum soil salinity was found at 12.42–31.48 ppt and 8.00–34.01 ppt (Setijanto et al., 2019).

According to Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018, Basyuni et al., 2018, Acanthus ilicifolius is a type of non-salt secreting mangroves of Ceriops tagal. The growth was found to be high at 0.5 % salinity and for Rhizophora apiculata seedlings, the number, length, and diameter of taproot were considerably enhanced by salt levels. Generally, Mangrove seedlings should receive low saline water for up to 4–5 months followed by medium saltwater, to attain the highest maturation and survival (Kodikara et al., 2018). The best growth of C. tagal seedlings was determined at 0.5 % salinity (Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019). The species tolerant to salinity regarding natural species dispersal and habitats are as follows:

Avicennia marina & Avicennia alba (most foreshore species) > R. stylosa and R. apiculate > C. tagal > A. ilicifolius (most landward species) (Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019).
2.2. Physiological adaptations of mangroves under salinity
2.2.1. Photosynthesis in true mangroves

Photosynthesis is a vital process in the plant kingdom. It is mainly determined by a set of conditions that tend to affect the photosynthetic rates in plants. In mangroves, photosynthesis mainly depends on salinity. High salinity affects the water holding capacity of the leaves during photosynthesis. Similarly, a decrease in the concentration of chlorophyll a and b could be noticed during the process. As salinity increases, the photosynthetic gas exchange rates and photosynthetic light reaction performance decreases. In the seedling of Rhizophora mangle, the use of leaf stomatal conductance and chlorophyll fluorescence as a parameter of photosynthesis helped in the quantification of a known stressor ‘salinity’ rapidly and reliably. (Biber, 2006). Similarly, in B. gymnorrhiza, E. agallocha, and P. paludosa, the ideal PAR acquisition for photosynthesis was high under salinity stress whereas in H. fomes and X. granatum the photosynthesis was lower under non-saline conditions even at higher illumination (Nandy et al., 2009).

The plants developing in the high salinity zone display high coherence in exchange with electrons between the oxygen-evolving complex and the acceptor site of the PSII. The plants maturing in the lowest salinity zone display higher efficiency in reducing the final acceptors of the PSI, which plays a vital blueprint in the stress conditions (Lopes et al., 2019). In oligohaline conditions, under constant low salinity and relatively high nitrogen levels, R. mangle is tended to achieve lower photosynthetic rates than the other mangrove counterparts, and command the group (Rodríguez-Rodríguez et al., 2018). It was hypothesized by (Aspinwall et al., 2021) that increasing salinity can reduce the rate of net photosynthesis of leaves at higher temperatures and high-water vapor deficit in contrast to cold temperatures and low water vapor deficit due to limitations induced by CO2 diffusion. Photosynthesis and light are interdependent, as light affects the photosynthetic rates more than salinity. Photosynthesis occurs more effectively at low light than at high salinity. Interestingly, at higher salinities, the leaf respiration to assimilation ratio multiplies four times indicating that salinity has a crucial role in the decline of net photosynthesis rates (Denoyer et al., 2006).

Ball and Farquhar (1984) studied the relationship between salinity and photosynthesis in two true mangroves: Aegiceras corniculatum, and Avicennia marina. Salinity increased photosynthetic rates decreased rapidly in A. corniculatum being more sensitive and the declining photosynthetic activity was enhanced by the increasing leaf to air vapor pressure difference indicating that stomatal conductance and photosynthetic ability combinatorically affected the rate of assimilation which decreased with increasing salinity. Thus, photosynthesis is a key factor for plants, but as salinity increases plant growth decreases and also productivity by disturbing the physiological processes.
2.2.2. Ion homeostasis in true mangroves

Ion homeostasis is a dynamic process that is fundamentally required for all organisms. The organisms have developed specialized mechanisms to store these essential elements to maintain their cytosolic functions within a specific physiological range for their development. Fig. 2 shows that under high salinity plants suffer from osmotic and ionic stress due to the accumulation of salts inside and outside the plant cells and roots respectively (Horie et al., 2012). An increase in salinity results in the reduction of biomass and the survival of plants. Additionally, the salinity effect on stomatal conductance is comparatively low, reflecting the negative impacts of high salinity with ion toxicity than gas exchange

According to Ion and sugar content analysis, the salt tolerance of Burma mangroves ascribes to their ability to accumulate high Na+ and Cl- ion concentrations. Even under stress-less conditions, they can uptake additional Na+ and Cl- as osmolytes and for maintenance of K+ homeostasis (Miyama and Tada, 2008). According to Zhao et al. (2019), as salinity increases, there is a sharp decrease in the concentration of nitrogen in roots and leaves. Inhibited root aeration forms a defense mechanism for the salt root symptoms which are futile for rhizosphere nitrification and nitrogen uptake by A. marina (Zhao et al., 2019). Titah et al. (2019) added that Rhizophora mucronata changes the color of its leaves to brown and softer stems due to the multiple cell damage and reduction of sodium and chloride amounts at the salinity concentration of 50,000 mg/L. He concluded that the high concentration of salt (> 30,000 mg/L) can be toxic to mangroves (Titah et al., 2019).

The roots of some mangrove plants show an ultra-filtration mechanism called reverse osmosis in their root zone for the separation of seawater into salts and water. The roots of certain mangroves exposed to low saline water or FW (Freshwater) experience daily FS (Fluctuating Salinity) that increases their adaptability by reducing the salt built up and water loss but absorbs a sufficient amount of Na+ and Cl- ions for the osmotic adjustment (Wang et al., 2020). Similarly, seeds from parent trees that grow on tidal mudflats show more negative osmotic potentials with sodium and chloride being the least and potassium the most abundant inorganic ions when compared with seawater (Downton, 1982). A comparison study shows that the nutrient uptake is independent of Na+ ions in R. mucronata than in Z. marina (Kanai and Sakai, 2021). Under high external salinity, the salt-induced Ca2+ ions maintain K+/Na+ homeostasis in B. gymnorrhiza (Lu et al., 2013). Ion homeostasis is very important for the mangroves to stay alive and thrive in extreme conditions.
2.2.3. Biomass yield in true mangroves

On a global scale, tropical mangrove forests have high above-ground biomass than temperate forests. The biomass of mangrove forests mainly varies with its age, dominant species, and locality. Generally, in the mangrove forest, the above-ground biomass is relatively low near the sea and increases near inland. Generally, mangroves accumulate more biomass in their roots and their ratio of above-ground biomass to below-ground biomass is significantly much lower than terrestrial forests 

Under salinity, the tissues of leaves and roots of Bruguiera cylindrica are dominated by the organic compound dolichol, which subsequently relaxes the freshwater (Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019, Basyuni et al., 2019). When the salinity is high, the rate of root respiration will be low due to the high metabolic activity in the shoots of both species: A. marina (Forsk.) Vierh. (Grey mangrove), and A. corniculatum (L.) Blanco, a river mangrove (Medina-Calderón et al., 2021) measures the allocation of production and turnover of roots under low salinity (< 20 PSU), flooding and their sulfide concentrations show the lowest root biomass. Similarly, a study shows that Bruguiera cylindrica can withstand high sodium levels, up to 500 mM NaCl without any diffidence in photosynthesis and metabolite agglomeration (Palliyath and Puthur, 2018). The level of carotenoid and proline in leaves of B. gymnorrhiza of Indian Sundarbans are not affected by fluctuations in the salinity whereas they can easily adapt to the high saline conditions experienced in the central sector of the deltaic complex around the Malta River (P, 2017).

In A. corniculatum seedlings, change in biomass, SOD, and CAT activity confirms that they are more adapted to growing in an environment with high salinity and longer flooding time than compared to B. sexangula (Lv et al., 2019). Usually, as salinity increases, the shoot and root biomass of mangroves decreases, but its hypocotyl biomass increases. Under different salinity treatments, the total biomass yield of mangroves remains the same (Shiau et al., 2017). Mangrove migration caused by salinity will have a strong deteriorating impact on the timber value if the highest valued timber species, Heritiera fomes are lost (Dasgupta et al., 2017). Heritiera littoralis is more delicate to salinity whereas, B. gymnorrhiza survives the highest saline conditions, creating B. gymnorrhiza a valuable species in the restoration of vulnerable mangrove forests (Mangora et al., 2017). In the Sitakunda coast of Bangladesh, soil pH and soil salinity were significantly higher in barren land whereas soil organic matter which was analyzed before the afforestation of mangrove forests was low (Mamun et al., 2021). With the continuous evaluation and monitoring, the mature stands of different saline zones of Sundarbans and Bangladesh mangrove forest have finer root biomass, which is capable of mangrove restoration thereby reducing the shoreline or coastal erosion caused by tidal inundation (Ahmed et al., 2021). In 2021, Lanka and Suraweera identified the surviving ability of different mangrove species, and their experimental success was shown through the growth of seedlings. Thus, a successful mangrove rehabilitation process can be carried out by determining the soil salinity, pH, etc. which provides the core basis of mangrove restoration and conservation programs.
2.2.4. Filtration mechanism in true mangroves

According to Naidoo and Von Willert (1995), greater assimilation at high salinity lowers the loss of carbon via photorespiration, efficient salt excretion, and sequestration in Avicennia germinans and Aegialitis annulata. The quantification of the salt secretion from the salt glands of leaves and their accumulation on the upper surface reveals a straight increase of salt secretion with the simultaneous rise in the salt treatment period. Taking into consideration, Bruguiera gymnorhiza exhibits an effectual salt embargo from chloroplasts even though increased salt stress causes a rapid and high concentration of Na+ and Cl- in the leaves. When compared with K. candel, the Na+ ion production within the cell wall, cytoplasm, vacuole, and chloroplast remained to be from 23 % to 72 % which is lower in stressed B. gymnorhiza (Li et al., 2008).

According to Lawton et al. (1981), the length and thickness of the root cap, phenolic content, the development of the Casparian strip in the endodermis, and the differentiation of the vascular tissues differ in the root structure of the Avicennia marina (Forsk.) Vierb., a salt excretor, and Bruguiera gymnorrhiza (L.) Lam., an excluder (non-excretory). Lower and higher salt excretion was observed on seaward leaves with high salt deposition, and on landward leaves with low salt deposition respectively (Griffiths et al., 2008). In a comparative study among A. corniculatum and A. marina, A. corniculatum shows that the amount of salt secreted per mole water transpired (and hence also per mole carbon gained) increases with increasing salinity. These salt balance differences are related to the higher sensitivity of A. corniculatum to appraising salinity (Ball, 1988). In mangrove leaves, Salt excretion by specialized glands helps in the maintenance of a NaCl level. For non-excreting species, re-translocation of NaCI through the phloem and increase in succulence also helps in the maintenance of a stable NaCl level in the leaves (Popp et al., 1993). Rhizophora mucronata, Ceriops decandra, Bruguiera gymnorrhiza, and Kandelia candel, are a few salt excluders of the mangrove community with an excluding capacity of 90 % in the ambient seawater or estuarine system or any brackish water. There is a positive correlation is displayed with the total amount of salt excreted and the total amount of water transpired in the leaves of the Avicennia marina (Drennan and Pammenter, 1982). Fig. 4 shows that mangrove roots, depict an apoplastic barrier deposition accounting for an increased resistance to bypass the flow of efficient salt exclusions (Krishnamurthy et al., 2014). This mechanism helps in easier propagation, scientific plantation, and thereby conservation of mangroves.

2.2.5. Water relations

Water stress paved the way for impecunious shoot growth at higher saline concentrations (Clough, 1984). A. marina, having salt-secreting glands in its leaves, is more salt-tolerant than R. stylosa which lacks salt-secreting glands. Inter-specific dissimilarities in salt tolerance were consonant with the varied distribution of S. alba and S. lanceolata along with the natural salinity gradients in northern Australia, with seasonal variation in salinity being a principal factor in their existence in many environments (Ball and Pidsley, 1995). Ceriops tagal responded as an osmoconformer, C. tagal and A. marina being in the same level of salt tolerance, they would not acclimatize to the sudden shift in salinity. It could be utilized to readapt inter-tidal zones, receiving a regular supply of freshwater (Aziz and Khan, 2001). Low salinity along with reduced light appears to favor R. mangle and B. sexangula uniformly. But at higher salinity, the seedling of B. sexangula is found to dominate whereas higher light levels in R. mangle are found to be more dominating (Krauss and Allen, 2003). On basis of salinity tolerance species could be classified in descending order as A. marina > R. mucronata > R. apiculata > B. gymnorrhiza > A. officinalis > B. sexangula > S. caseolaris, hence taxonomically similar species and those sharing vivipary characteristics may be far away in salt tolerance (Jayatissa et al., 2008).

When the Yucan Peninsula of South Eastern Mexico, was monitored using remote sensing (RS) technology, air temperature increased from March to August with an associated increase in salinity, and an increase in rainfall which seems to be accompanied by a decrease in salinity (Pastor-Guzman et al., 2018). It was proved that there is a higher salt concentration tolerance in the seedlings of A. marina when pre-cultivated with the salty tide in contrast to the freshwater cultivation. It advocates a barrier property of suberization that deals with salt exclusion in mangroves, and highlights the importance of moderate salt pre-treatment in helping to withstand high salinity (Cheng et al., 2020). According to Nguyen et al. (2017), water storage in leaves was found to increase with increasing salinity and aridity. Heritiera fomes of the Indian Sundarbans region can sustain and propagate under a low saline environment (Mitra, 2017). In the Ayeyarwady Coastal Delta Zone (ADCZ) of Myanmar, fifteen species of mangroves were documented as the highest salt-tolerant species as observed in both low and high salinity areas. Areas with higher salinity areas are likely to be endangered to low salinity corresponding to an increase in freshwater supply into the river network in ADCZ concerning precipitation, water flow from upstream, and the Ayeyarwady's catchment. And the area with lesser salinity is likely to be at risk of both mean sea level rise (MSLR) and higher salinity due to climate deterioration (Win et al., 2019).

Porewater salinity ranged from 15 to 30 ppt, being higher at mangrove island edges than centers (Hogan et al., 2021). A. marina was more strongly associated with soils with high water content where the probability of occurrence of R. stylosa. Bruguiera gymnorrhiza had high constancy to locations with low pore water salinity influenced by groundwater (Hill et al., 2021). The hindrance of the landward margin will result in vertical rise, owing to water-logging and ultimately destroying the mangroves and their relied biota (Jagtap and Nagle, 2007). Mangrove pollen can be used as a sea-level indicator if mangrove vegetation is (i) zoned at a more extensive lateral scale (ii) is closely associated with modern pollen rain and surface sediments, and (iii) sedimentological conditions promote the preservation of pollen in fossil sequences (Sefton and Woodroffe, 2021).
2.2.5.1. Phytochemical and bioactive properties of mangroves

Tidal fluctuations, herbivore pressure, hypoxia, and other unfavorable stressful saline conditions lead to the generation of excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS) in coastal halophytes (Sharifi-Rad et al., 2016). Mangroves are equipped with a various antioxidant and metabolic system that prevents this ROS-mediated cellular damage, metabolic disorders, and senescence processes by producing various types of phenolics, flavonoids, and other phytochemicals (Eswaraiaha et al., 2019). Mangroves can be used as a potent source of antimicrobials, insecticides, antidiabetics, anticancer, and antioxidants due to the production of a large variety of bioactive compounds (Suresh et al., 2017, Nayak et al., 2018).

Mangroves present in the Indian Sundarbans mainly the Suaeda species are the largest producers of antibacterial, antifungal, mosquitocidal, anticancer, hepatoprotective, phytotoxic, diuretic, and antioxidant compounds. Extracts of mangrove species could be used as fodder against paralysis, asthma, snake bites, rheumatism, ulcers, hepatitis, toothache, leprosy, smallpox, as laxatives, etc (Khan et al., 2018). Leaves and shoots of the mangrove plants could be used for antiviral, antibacterial, and wound healing activities in addition to insecticide, and antiplasmodial activities against a large variety of organisms, also treat scabies. Extracts from Ipomoea pescaprae stem bark can be used for the production of cigarettes and the smoke of the cigarettes relieves sinusitis pain (Al-Sais et al., 2017).

Mangrove plant extracts of Mora oleifera, Pellicierarhizophorae, Laguncularia racemose, etc inhibit α-glucosidase activity, and ethanolic extracts of S. apetala have antihyperglycemic properties due to the presence of the triterpenoids, flavonoids, phenolics, and tannins (Lopez et al.,2018). A large variety of mangrove plants like Rhizophora mucronate, Avicenna marina, and P. rhizophorae possess antidiabetic properties (Aljaghthmi et al., 2017). Thus, depicting mangroves exhibit antidiabetic activity. Methanolic extracts of S. alba inhibit the growth of various microorganisms such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus cereus, Escherichia coli I, and Staphylococcus aureus pathogenic strains (Haq et al., 2014). Polysioprenoids isolated from mangrove plant leaves have antimicrobial properties against E. coli, Candida albicans, and S. aureus, thus each and every part of the mangroves could be used against microbial activities (Sumardi et al., 2018).

Many mangrove species like Acrostichum aureum have the ability to suppress cancer cell proliferation in the lungs, pleura, and stomach (Thomas et al., 2016). Similarly, the crude plant extracts of A. alba show cytotoxic activities against breast cancer, due to the presence of the alkaloids, phenolics, and terpenoid compounds that exhibits apoptosis (Rahman et al., 2017). The leaves of the A. alba and Lumnitzera racemosa leaf extract have anticancer properties against human breast adenocarcinoma (MCF7) and HeLa cell lines (Eswaraiah et al., 2019a, Eswaraiah et al., 2019b). Under salt stress conditions, seedlings of A. corniculatum showed enhanced salt tolerance by reducing the lipid peroxidation and H2O2 content increased low-molecular-weight antioxidants like polyphenols, and reduced glutathione (Chen et al., 2014). These are regulated by nitric oxide (NO) present which are able to withstand the salt stress exhibiting that NO acts as an antioxidant under salt stress in mangrove plants.

Anti-inflammatory and antiviral activities are also exhibited by a wide variety of mangrove species. Oleanane triterpenoids, prenylated terpenoids from R. mucronata extracts, Guaianolide–type sesquiterpene lactones from chloroform leaf extracts of Rhizophora annamalayana contain oxygenated heterocyclic metabolites, and benzoxepins, which exhibits cyclooxygenase – 2 (COX-2) and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) inhibition (Raola and Chakraborty, 2017a, Raola and Chakraborty, 2017b). True mangroves like X. moluccensis possess antiviral activities against the pandemic influenza A virus. Four limonoids of the khayanolide type with 2-carbonyl could be extracted from the same plant. In the seeds of X. granatum five limonoids such as sundarbanxylogranins A-E (1–5) exhibit moderate antiviral activity against influenza A virus and HIV (Li et al., 2015). Mangrove plants such as L.racemosa, Ceriops decandra, Rhizophora apiculate, R.mucronata, and Bruguiera cylindrica possess antiplasmodial activity. Stem and twig extracts of Ceriops tagal show antifeedant activity, and antiwhite spot syndrome virus (WSSV) activity (Ravikumar et al., 2011). Thus, mangroves possess a wide variety of biological activities which could be used widely in the application. Among these activities, the pesticide activity of the mangroves is explained below in detail.
2.3. Pesticidal activity of the mangroves

In 2001, a study was conducted on the insecticidal activity of extracts from Rhizophora mucronate against three arthropods. The insecticidal and antifeedant activity from different parts of the mangrove tree was examined. The 70 % ethanol extracts of leaves, barks, stem wood, and piths were tested for toxicity against adults of the desert locust, larvae of Aedes aegyptii as well as from larvae of brine shrimp. The results display those tests carried out on the mosquito larvae, the bark and the pith extracts show high toxicity of 157.4 ppm and 168.3 ppm respectively. Similarly, the stem extracts show slow activity with the LC 50 of 1003.4 ppm, whereas the leaf extracts don’t show any toxic effects at a concentration of 1000 ppm. Thus, they concluded that a bulk of active compounds are sequestered in the bark, pith, and stem wood, indicating that R. mucronata is a potential source of botanical insecticides (Kabaru and Gichia, 2001). In another study, a total of nine different parts from five mangrove plants of Sundarbans were investigated for pesticide activity. Aegiceras corniculatum, Excoecaria agallocha, Heritiera fomes, Xylocarpus moluccensis, and Xylocarpus granatum were extracted and tested for insecticidal activity against the stored pests Sitophilus oryzae and Sitophilus zeamais. Tree bark extracts displayed potent and statistically significant insecticidal activity against the pests with a success rate of 80–100 %. The authors concluded that it is a novel study that could be useful in future studies aiming for the development of new biopesticides from mangrove plants (Rahman et al., 2021).

In 2015, Vijaya Sankar and Abideen examined the pesticide effect of Green synthesized silver and lead nanoparticles using Avicennia marina against the grain storage pest Sitophilus oryzae. The study was conducted to test the pesticide activity along with the antimicrobial activity against the seven bacterial samples. The result displayed that the synthesized silver nanoparticles using Avicenna marina were more effective than others. Complete mortality of 100% was observed for 4 days. The results concluded that the maximum yield of silver nanoparticles by mangroves was due to the presence of high content of secondary metabolites such as polyphenols, flavonoids, and tannins. Additionally, the plant showed potential antibacterial activity with bacterial pathogens indicating its future usage as a potential antibacterial agent. A study was conducted in West Kalimantan, Indonesia on the bacteria isolated from the mangrove park. The study aimed at identifying and evaluating the antibacterial and toxicity of an actinobacterium isolated from mangrove mud. They concluded that the bacteria Pseudonocardia sp. SM1A that was isolated is a potential source of the lead compounds for drug discovery, particularly the antibacterial and toxicological activities. The toxicity activity of the bacteria shows antitumor, cytotoxic, and pesticide activities (Nofiani et al., 2022).

Many mangroves display larvicidal activities against a wide range of pests mainly mosquitos. The leaf extracts of Rhizophora mucronate, a red mangrove exhibit larvicidal potential and are a good repellant against three medically challenging Arthropod vectors. The diverse solvent leaf extracts of plants were used against the early four instar stages of the larvae mainly Anopheles stephensi, Culex quinquefasciatus, and Aedes aegypti mosquito vectors were determined. The greatest efficacy was displayed by the acetone extract of R. mucronata for Cx. Quinquefasciatus followed by An. stephensi, and Ae. aegypti. The acetone extracts of the mangrove plant were further fractioned into four fractions and tested for their larvicidal activity. Out of four, Fraction 3 showed the stronger larvicidal activity against all three mosquito larvae. Phytol, 3,7,11,15-tetramethyl – 2-hexadecen-1-ol, 1-hexyl-2-nitrocyclohexane, and eicosanoic acid were chemical characterization of acetone extracts. Similarly, the enzyme assay displayed that F3-fractions exert divergent effects on all the three mosquitos’ biochemical defensive mechanisms. Additionally, repellant activity was exhibited against all three mosquito vectors up to a maximum of 210 min. Thus, the study provides an overview of the bioactive molecules in the acetone extract of R. mucronata leaves exhibiting significant larvicidal and enzyme inhibitory activity and is an excellent tool for mosquito control (Karthi et al., 2020).

Aedes aegyptii is a dangerous pest that causes dengue fever mainly. Many studies have been done against mosquito control. Ali et al. (2014) examined the insecticidal compounds from Rhizophorceae mangrove plants for the management of the dengue vector Aedes aegypti. Different plant parts such as leaf, bark, root, stilt root, hypocotyl, and flowers of the mangrove family were collected. Bruguiera cylindrica, Ceriops decandra, Rhizophora mucronate, and R. apiculata are the main species collected for examination among the family Rhizophoraceae. The larval mortality was observed after 24 h exposure and the repellency bioassays were also carried out in a 10 × 10 × 3 m room at 27–35 °C. The experiment displayed that the stilt root crude extract of the R. mucronata showed the maximum larvicidal activity with LC 50 value of 0.0275 ± 0.00066 μg /ml and 0.0695 ± 0.156 μg/ml of LC 90 value and this was followed by bark extract. The column chromatographic fractions of the R. mucronata bark extracts showed the maximum larvicidal activity followed by the acetone extracts. Similarly, the ethanolic fraction of R. mucronata stilt root extracts showed the maximum larvicidal activity followed by the acetone fraction. Similarly, the highest repellant activity of 97.5% was shown by the stilt root and bark extracts of the same mangrove. Additionally, the ethanolic fraction of the stilt roots extracts displayed 100 % of protection with 10 h protection time at 4 mg concentration. Thus, the study concluded that R. mucronata possesses a wide variety of biopesticidal compounds (Ali et al., 2014). A large variety of the mangroves are screened and analyzed to resist the bite of the mosquitos. The study displayed that the methanolic leaf extracts from several mangroves at a dosage of 100 % can resist the mosquitoes above 80 % per hour. The leaf extracts of the Sonneratia alba resisted up to 85.8 % for 2 h followed by Avicennia marina (82,5 % for 3 h); Avicennia alba (80.5 % for 1 h); Rhizophora apiculata (80.3 % for 2 h); and Rhizophora stylosa leaf extracts for 1-h resistance up to 80.5 %. Additionally, the leaf extracts of the Sonneratia caseolaris, Acanthus ilicifolius, Nypa fruticans, Hibiscus tiliaceus, Crimum aciaticum, Melastoma candidum, Bruguiera gymnorrhiza were just able to resist the bite of the mosquitos up to 80 %. Thus, the study concluded that methanolic leaf extracts of Sonneratia alba and Avicennia marina were repellants and their leaves indicated the presence of one or more active compounds as a new repellant candidate (Syahri et al., 2018).

Mangroves show an excellent insect antifeedant and toxic activity against certain agricultural and stored product pests such as Spodoptera litura. The bioefficacy of the mangrove plant Sonneratia caseolaris and its associate plant Hibiscus tiliaceus were tested. The leaves extracted with acetone yielded crude extract and showed significant antifeedant activity in the 2nd and 3rd instar larvae of S. litura. The topical application of plant crude extracts resulted in toxicity to the lepidopteran pest. The extracts have a considerable effect on S. litura metamorphosis in the form of delayed pupal formation and morphogenetic abnormalities in pupae due to the larval treatment, thus affecting the adult eclosion. The crude leaf extracts possess moderate insecticidal activity to all three types of pests: flour beetle, rice weevil, and lesser grain borer. All the eluted fractions from both plants show excellent antifeedant activity on S. litura than crude extracts, especially the

hexane eluted fraction of the crude extracts of both marine plants showed potent growth inhibitory activity (Rani et al., 2015). Gnanadesigan et al. (2011) evinced the biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles from the aqueous extract of R. mucronata will serve as a potential source for the larvicidal activity against mosquito-borne diseases.

3. Conclusion

Salinity is one of the major abiotic stresses that affect plant growth and development. True mangroves can tolerate high salinity by rejecting potentially harmful salts, due to their special adaptations. The present study revolves around the physiological and morphological adaptations of true mangroves under salinity stress and their phytochemical and bioactive properties with special reference to the pesticide activity of mangroves. From this review, we can conclude that true mangroves can be propagated easily under varied saline conditions, viz., from low to high. Certain true mangrove species like Avicennia marina can thrive in high salt conditions and geographical factors also play a significant role in the salinity fluctuation. A similar effect on growth, photosynthesis, ion regulation, biomass yield, and water relations is seen due to salinity stress. Salt exclusion is a specialized feature of mangrove plants through which excess salt is released out through their leaves using salt glands. But a higher concentration of salinity is harmful to the plant as it will be having an adverse toxic effect.

Biologically active compounds such as limonoids, terpenoids, alkaloids, glycosides, steroids, flavonoids, esters, quinones, phenols, acids, aliphatic alcohol, amides, lactones, aliphatic ketones, and benzodioxols have been derived from the leaves, stems, barks, fruits, and seeds of mangrove plants. Organic pesticides could also be extracted which paves the way for the development of socio-economic reforms as well as the successful utilization of the plant. All the mangrove plant parts i.e., root, bark, stem, and leaf could be a potential source of biopesticide. Certain insecticidal and antifeedant activities of mangroves make them a useful source of a botanical insecticide. These insecticides are biodegradable and harmless to the environment. Overexploitation of mangroves can destroy the plants, which in turn results in the depletion of the natural resource.

Eventually, we can conclude that genetic modification of mangrove genes could be a vitally important tool to alleviate the earth’s future problems regarding food, energy, and environment mainly due to their spectacular adaptions against salt tolerance.